SOFTWARE Open Access
Bios2mds: an R package for comparing
orthologous protein families by metric
multidimensional scaling
Julien Pelé1†, Jean-Michel Bécu1†, Hervé Abdi2 and Marie Chabbert1*
Abstract
Background: The distance matrix computed from multiple alignments of homologous sequences is widely used by
distance-based phylogenetic methods to provide information on the evolution of protein families. This matrix can
also be visualized in a low dimensional space by metric multidimensional scaling (MDS). Applied to protein families,
MDS provides information complementary to the information derived from tree-based methods. Moreover, MDS
gives a unique opportunity to compare orthologous sequence sets because it can add supplementary elements to
a reference space.
Results: The R package bios2mds (from BIOlogical Sequences to MultiDimensional Scaling) has been designed to
analyze multiple sequence alignments by MDS. Bios2mds starts with a sequence alignment, builds a matrix of
distances between the aligned sequences, and represents this matrix by MDS to visualize a sequence space. This
package also offers the possibility of performing K-means clustering in the MDS derived sequence space. Most
importantly, bios2mds includes a function that projects supplementary elements (a.k.a. “out of sample” elements)
onto the space defined by reference or “active” elements. Orthologous sequence sets can thus be compared in a
straightforward way. The data analysis and visualization tools have been specifically designed for an easy
monitoring of the evolutionary drift of protein sub-families.
Conclusions: The bios2mds package provides the tools for a complete integrated pipeline aimed at the MDS
analysis of multiple sets of orthologous sequences in the R statistical environment. In addition, as the analysis can
be carried out from user provided matrices, the projection function can be widely used on any kind of data.
Keywords: Metric multidimensional scaling (MDS), Principal coordinate analysis, R program, Supplementary
elements, Evolution, Protein family, Phylogeny
Background
The multiple alignment of homologous sequences provides
important information on the evolution and the
sequence-function relationships of protein families. Two
types of methods, tree-based or space-based methods,
can be used to compare sequences (reviewed in [1]).
Both methods depend on a multiple alignment of homologous
sequences. Tree methods assume a hierarchical,
binary structure of the data to infer phylogenetic relationships.
On the other hand, space methods are based
on multivariate analysis of a distance matrix between the
sequences and do not assume a specific structure for the
data. Such a method is metric multidimensional (MDS)
which is a powerful method to visualize distances between
elements [2-5]. MDS, also named principal coordinate
analysis, starts from a matrix of distances between
elements and visualizes these elements in a low dimensional
space in which the distances best approximate the
original distances. Applied to biological sequences, this
method usefully complements phylogeny [6-11].
The completion of the genome sequencing of a wide
variety of organisms has paved the way to the comparison
of protein families from different species. A very
interesting property of MDS is the possibility to project
supplementary elements onto a reference or “active”
* Correspondence: marie.chabbert@univ-angers.fr
†Equal contributors
1CNRS UMR 6214 – INSERM 1083, Faculté de Médecine, 3 rue Haute de
Reculée, Angers 49045, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2012 Pelé et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Pelé et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2012, 13:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/13/133
space. The positions of the supplementary elements (a.k.
a. “out of sample” elements) are obtained from their distance
to the active elements [2,12,13]. This property provides
a very useful tool to compare orthologous
sequences to a reference sequence set. In particular,
when several orthologous protein families are compared,
this method can be used to visualize evolutionary drifts
[9].
MDS is based on the eigen-decomposition (i.e., principal
component analysis) of a cross-product matrix
derived from the distance matrix [2-5] and can be performed
with the default tools included in the R statistical
language (e.g., cmds function). In addition, several R
packages such as ade4, made4, adegenet, and vegan [14-
17] have been developed to provide multivariate analysis
in the field of bioinformatics, including MDS. For example,
the dudi.pca function in ade4 [14] or the
wcmdscale function in vegan [17] performs MDS analysis.
However, the projection technique has not been
widely used yet and, to the best of our knowledge, is not
included in the available R packages.
Thus, we have developed the R package bios2mds
(from BIOlogical Sequences to MultiDimensional Scaling)
to provide all the tools necessary to perform the
MDS analysis of multiple sequence alignments. This
package includes a function that projects supplementary
sequences onto a reference space and, thus, makes it
possible to compare orthologous sequence sets.
Implementation
Main features
The bios2mds package has been developed in the R statistical
environment. R was chosen because it is opensource,
accessible under the GNU General Public License
and widely used within the bioinformatics community.
R packages can take advantage of functions already
developed in available packages. Here, the aim of the
package is to provide the tools necessary to compare
orthologous sequence sets by MDS analysis, namely to
analyze the active set by metric MDS to define an active
space and project supplementary orthologous sequences
onto this active space.
While it is possible to use available packages such as
ape [18] and seqinr [19] to read sequences and compute
distance matrices, we preferred to avoid too many dependencies
for clarity purpose. Thus the corresponding
functions were rewritten and included into the bios2mds
package. Concerning the MDS computation, the cmds
function provided by R gives the final results (coordinates
and eigenvalues) but does not give access to the
intermediary matrices that are required for the projection
technique. It was thus necessary to write an MDS
function from its basic equations in order to perform the
projection of supplementary elements.
Functionalities
Here, we present the main functionalities of bios2mds.
The package provides a complete R environment for
MDS analysis in the context of protein sequences. It
includes functions for data import, MDS computation,
clustering and visualization of the results.
Data import
Multidimensional scaling relies on distance matrices.
The user can provide these distance matrices or compute
them from multiple sequence alignments in the FASTA
or MSF formats. Sequence alignments are read in with
the import.fasta or import.msf functions. Several measures
of distances can be computed for multiple alignments
of protein sequences: the Euclidean distances
based on the square roots of the difference scores [20],
the distances based on the difference scores and the distances
based on dissimilarity scores computed from
amino acid substitution matrices. The substitution matrices
provided with bios2mds are the JTT [21] and the
Gonnet [22] matrices, the BLOSUM [23] and the PAM
[24] series, along with the PHAT [25] and JTT_TM [26]
matrices, more specifically developed for membrane proteins.
The distances based on the difference scores can
also be used for nucleotide sequences. More sophisticated
measures of DNA distances can be found in several
packages, such as ade4, ape, and phangorn
[14,18,27].
MDS computation
Briefly, given a matrix of (squared) distances between
elements, MDS transforms this matrix of squared distances
into a cross-product matrix whose eigendecomposition
provides the factor score matrix giving
the coordinates of the elements on the principal components
[2-5]. The projection of supplementary elements
onto the active space depends on the matrix of distances
between the supplementary and the active elements and
on the factor score matrix of the active elements
[2,12,13]. To make the projection possible and to facilitate
subsequent data analysis especially in the case of
orthologous sequence sets, we provide the mmds function
(corresponding to the cmds command from R, but
with a customized output) and the mmds.project function
that performs projection of supplementary elements
onto an active space.
Clustering
The MDS representation of the sequence space can be
analyzed by K-means in order to find clusters. This part
of bios2mds depends on the amap [28], e1071 [29], and
cluster [30] packages. The kmeans.run function that we
have developed assesses the robustness of the clustering.
It depends on the Kmeans and the matchClasses
Pelé et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2012, 13:133 Page 2 of 7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/13/133
functions from the amap and e1071 packages, respectively.
The kmeans.run function performs multiple runs
of Kmeans from the amap package and analyzes the
resulting clusters with the matchClasses function from
the e1071 package. The output of kmeans.run provides
the most frequent clustering solution, with the list of the
members of each cluster and their relative membership
to this cluster in the different runs. The sil.score function
performs multiple runs of the silhouette function from
the cluster package. The silhouette function helps determining
the optimal number of clusters [31]. Multiple
runs with sil.score allow taking into account the clustering
uncertainty. The write.fasta function allows users to
retrieve the multiple sequence alignment of each cluster,
in FASTA format, for further analysis.
Visualization
The package bios2mds contains graphical tools to
visualize the results of the MDS analysis in R. The
mmds.2D.plot and mmds.3D.plot functions are used for
2D and 3D representations, respectively, of active and
supplementary elements, on the same graph, on user
selected components. The mmds.3D.plot function is
based on plot3D from the rgl package [32] that provides
an interactive tool for 3D visualization within the R environment.
The col.group function allows the use of a
color code for plotting the 2D and 3D graphs, based on
groupings and colors defined by the user in CSV files,
for both active and supplementary elements. The
mmds.2D.multi function visualizes the barycenters of the
groups defined by the user in the 2D representation of
the active elements. Finally, the write.mmds.pdb function
allows users to export the coordinates of each element
on the first three components obtained by MDS in a
PDB format for visualization with a molecular graphics
program, such as Pymol (www.pymol.org) or Rasmol
(www.openrasmol.org). When col.group is used, each
user-defined group corresponds to a different PDB chain
number to facilitate selection and coloring.
Results and discussion
In this section, we show and discuss the results obtained
by typical MDS analyses. The input consists of nonredundant
sets of non-olfactory class A G-proteincoupled
receptors (GPCRs) from different species [9,33].
Two types of analysis make sense: the analysis of paralogous
sequences, yielding a sequence space, and the comparison
of orthologous sequences, using the projection
technique.
Analysis of paralogous sequences
The human set includes 283 aligned sequences of GPCRs
[9]. The MDS analysis of this set provides a typical sequence
space (Figure 1). In this example, the distances
between sequences are equal to their difference scores
and the 3D sequence space of human GPCRs is displayed
with the plot3D command from the rgl package
[32] that allows interactive 3D representation within the
R environment. The elements are colored using the
color.group function based on the prior knowledge of the
twelve GPCR sub-families present in humans [9,33,34].
Clustering allows the grouping of these sub-families into
four groups that correspond to major pathways of GPCR
evolution [9].
Different distance matrices can be computed from a
multiple sequence alignment. These matrices are based
either on a difference score or on a dissimilarity score
obtained with an amino acid substitution matrix. In
MDS, the distance matrix should be Euclidean or close
to a Euclidean matrix. Distances equal to the square
roots of the difference scores are Euclidean [20], and the
MDS analysis of the corresponding matrix gives only
positive eigenvalues. Distances equal to the difference
scores give negative eigenvalues representing about 3%
of the variance, whereas distances based on dissimilarity
scores give negative eigenvalues that can represent from
3 to 7% of the variance (Table 1).
The sequence spaces of human GPCRs obtained with
the different distance matrices do not reveal dramatic
differences and the overall patterns are maintained
(Figure 2). In particular, the sequence spaces obtained
Figure 1 3D representation of the GPCR sequence space. A
typical multiple sequence alignment of 283 GPCRs from H. sapiens
was analyzed by MDS, with distances based on difference scores.
The 3D space is defined by the first three components of the MDS
analysis. The color code refers to the different sub-families of human
GPCRs, with unclassified receptors colored in black. Plot obtained
with the mmds.3D.plot function after coloring by GPCR sub-families
with the col.group function.
Pelé et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2012, 13:133 Page 3 of 7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/13/133
from the difference scores or their square roots are very
similar and the slight changes observed with dissimilarity
scores are quite independent of the matrix used for the
computation. This is illustrated in Figures 2c and d that
show the 2D sequence spaces obtained with the “best”
and the “worst” matrices, as defined by comparison to
Euclidean distances (Table 1)
The “noise” of the data can be estimated from the
MDS analysis of a random sequence alignment (Figure 3)
that is generated with the random function and has the
same length, number of sequences, and amino acid composition
as the initial alignment.
Comparison of orthologous sequence sets
In the example shown in Figure 4, the input consists of
two sets of aligned sequences [9]: the set of 283 GPCR
sequences from H. sapiens and a set of 538 GPCR
sequences from N. vectensis (the sea anemone). Among
these anemone sequences, 139 can be assigned to five
sub-families present in humans. The mmds.project function
projects the “supplementary” sequences onto the
“active” sequence space. The positions of the supplementary
elements depend only on their distances to active
Figure 2 Comparison of scoring methods. The 2D sequence space of human GPCRs, defined by the first two components of the MDS analysis,
was obtained with distances equal to the square roots of the difference scores (a), to the difference scores (b), to the dissimilarity scores
calculated from the BLOSUM45 matrix (c) or from the JTT_TM matrix (d). The color code refers to the different sub-families of human GPCRs, with
unclassified receptors colored in black. Plots drawn with the mmds.2D.plot function after coloring by GPCR sub-families with the col.group
function.
Table 1 Comparison of scoring methods
Scoring method % negative components
Difference Square root 0
Difference 3.2
Dissimilarity BLOSUM30 4.1
BLOSUM45 3.5
BLOSUM62 3.6
BLOSUM80 3.5
PAM40 4.3
PAM80 4.8
PAM120 5.1
PAM160 5.6
PAM250 6.3
GONNET 3.5
JTT 6.5
JTT_TM 6.7
PHAT 4.1
The percent of negative components represents the weight of negative
components in the variance of the data.
Pelé et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2012, 13:133 Page 4 of 7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/13/133
elements. Either set can be alternatively active or supplementary.
By this way, we can analyze the GPCR evolution
from the point of view of humans or of sea anemones.
Figures 4a and b show the projection of the assigned
and unassigned sequences from N. vectensis, respectively,
onto the sequence space of human GPCRs. As previously
discussed [9], receptors that cannot be assigned to a
human sub-family are projected onto the centre of the
human space since their specific evolution is expected to
happen on perpendicular dimensions. The GPCR sequence
space of the sea anemone has a cross shape
(Figure 4c) and is driven by several large sub-families
with no equivalent in humans. For clarity purpose, we
project separately the human GPCRs from either “ancient”
or “recent” sub-families onto this sequence space
(Figures 4c and d, respectively). The “ancient” subfamilies
are those present both in N. vectensis and in H.
sapiens [9]. The projection of the human receptors from
these “ancient” sub-families onto the anemone sequence
space is consistent with the reverse projection (compare
Figures 4a and c). Similarly, the human receptors from
“recent” sub-families, with no equivalent in N. vectensis,
are projected towards the centre of the anemone sequence
space (Figure 4d).
Figure 4 Projection of supplementary elements. Multiple sequence alignments of GPCRs from H. sapiens and N. vectensis were analyzed by
MDS, using either human GPCRs (a, b) or anemone GPCRs (c, d) as active sequences and the other set as supplementary sequences. The active
and supplementary sequences are respectively represented by dots and crosses. They are projected onto the plane defined by the first two
components of the active space. The color code refers to the different sub-families of humans GPCRs, with unclassified receptors colored in black.
Plots drawn with the mmds.2D.plot function after coloring by GPCR sub-families with the col.group function.
Figure 3 Sequence space of random sequences. The 2D
sequence space of random sequences corresponds to the first two
components of the MDS analysis of a random sequence alignment
with the same properties as the human GPCR set, obtained with the
random function. Plot drawn with the mmds.2D.plot function.
Pelé et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2012, 13:133 Page 5 of 7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/13/133
The usefulness of the projection technique is illustrated
by the example of the somatostatin/opioid receptor
sub-family (SO). The input consists of two sets of
aligned sequences: the human set that includes 14 SO
receptors, and a set of receptors from N. vectensis, C. elegans,
C. intestinalis and D. melanogaster that could be
assigned to the SO sub-family [9,33]. Figure 5 shows the
projection of the orthologous SO receptors onto the sequence
space of human GPCRs. We have shown previously
that this sub-family initiated from a deletion in an
ancestor of the peptide receptors (PEP) that led to the
split between these two sub-families [33]. The SO receptors
from remote species (N. vectensis and C. elegans)
are close to the PEP receptors, whereas those from the
chordate C. intestinalis and from the fruit fly D. melanogaster
(the allatostatin receptors 1 and 2 [35]), are
located at intermediary positions. Thus the projection
technique reveals the evolutionary drift of specific subfamilies.
Conclusions
The R package bios2mds provides users with a powerful
and flexible framework to perform multidimensional
scaling of multiple sequence alignments. The program
can import data directly as distance matrices or as multiple
sequence alignments from which distance matrices
are computed. The package bios2mds is tailored for the
analysis of protein sequences but can be adapted for nucleotide
sequences. Several R tools, including the cmds
command, offer the possibility to perform MDS analysis
of a distance matrix. However, to our knowledge, the
bios2mds package is unique in allowing the projection of
supplementary elements onto an active space in the R
environment. This property is especially suited for the
comparison of orthologous sequence sets and the evolution
of specific protein sub-families. The tools for the
visualization of the data have been designed to take advantage
of prior knowledge on the protein family under
scrutiny, for example its classification into sub-families
or the presence of specific sequence motifs. Finally, it
has to be emphasized that the input of the projection
function within bios2mds requires only active and supplementary
distances matrices. Thus this function can be
widely used for any kind of application.
Availability and requirements
– Project name: bios2mds
– Project home page: http://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/bios2mds/index.html
– Operating systems: Platform independent
– Programming language: R 2.12
– Other requirements: requires the amap, e1071,
cluster, scales and rgl packages
– License: GNU General Public License
– Any restrictions to use by non-academics: None
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
JP and JMB contributed equally to this work. JP and MC conceived the
package. HA provided the projection method and support to implement it in
R. JP and JMB wrote the software, which JP, MC and JMB tested and
debugged. MC wrote the first draft of the manuscript, which HA revised and
all authors approved.
Acknowledgements
We thank NEC Computers Services SARL (Angers, France) for the kind
provision of a multiprocessor server. We thank the Conseil Général de Maineet-
Loire for JP’s fellowship and the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire of Angers
and the CNRS for JMB’s studenship. We thank Dr P. Guardiola (Angers,
France) for stimulating discussion and advice.
Author details
1CNRS UMR 6214 – INSERM 1083, Faculté de Médecine, 3 rue Haute de
Reculée, Angers 49045, France. 2The University of Texas at Dallas, School of
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 800 West Campbell Road, Richardson, TX
75080-3021, USA.
Received: 3 January 2012 Accepted: 24 May 2012
Published: 15 June 2012
References
1. B-Rao C, Majumdar KC: Reconstruction of phylogenetic relationships.
J Biosci 1999, 24:121–137.
2. Abdi H: Metric multidimensional scaling. In Encyclopedia of Measurement
and Statistics. Edited by Salkind NJ. Thousand Oaks (CA): Sage; 2007:598–605.
Figure 5 Evolutionary drift. The active sequence space (open
circles) was obtained by the MDS analysis of the human GPCR set.
Human receptors from the SO and PEP sub-families are indicated by
red and green circles, respectively. The supplementary sequences
correspond to SO receptors from N. vectensis (closed diamonds), C.
elegans (open triangles), C. intestinalis (crosses) and D. melanogaster
(closed squares). The active and supplementary sequences are
projected onto the plane defined by the first two components of
the active space. Plot drawn with the mmds.2D.plot function.
Pelé et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2012, 13:133 Page 6 of 7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/13/133
3. Borg I, Groenen PJF: Modern multidimensional scaling. New York: Springer;
2005.
4. Gower JC: A comparison of some methods of cluster analysis. Biometrics
1967, 23:623–637.
5. Torgerson WS: Theory and methods of scaling. New York: Wiley; 1958.
6. Blackshields G, Sievers F, Shi W, Wilm A, Higgins DG: Sequence embedding
for fast construction of guide trees for multiple sequence alignment.
Algorithms Mol Biol 2010, 5:21.
7. B-Rao C, Majumbar K: Map-like representation of phylogenetic
relationships: Application to tilapiine fish. J Fish Biol 1998, 52:1199–1217.
8. Higgins DG: Sequence ordinations: a multivariate analysis approach to
analysing large sequence data sets. Comput Appl Biosci 1992, 8:15–22.
9. Pelé J, Abdi H, Moreau M, Thybert D, Chabbert M: Multidimensional scaling
reveals the main evolutionary pathways of class A G-protein-coupled
receptors. PLoS One 2011, 6:e19094.
10. Shi W, Lei F, Zhu C, Sievers F, Higgins DG: A complete analysis of HA and
NA genes of influenza A viruses. PLoS One 2010, 5:e14454.
11. Woolley KJ, Athalye M: A use for principal coordinate analysis in the
comparison of protein sequences. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1986,
140:808–813.
12. Trosset MW, Pribe CE: The out-of-sample problem for classical
multidimensional scaling. Computational statistics & data analysis 2008,
52:4635–4642.
13. Gower JC: Adding a Point to Vector Diagrams in Multivariate Analysis.
Biometrika 1968, 55:582–585.
14. Chessel D, Dufour AB, Thioulouse J: The ade4 package-I: One-table
methods. R news 2004, 4:5–10.
15. Culhane AC, Thioulouse J, Perriere G, Higgins DG: MADE4: an R package for
multivariate analysis of gene expression data. Bioinformatics 2005,
21:2789–2790.
16. Jombart T: adegenet: a R package for the multivariate analysis of genetic
markers. Bioinformatics 2008, 24:1403–1405.
17. Oksanen J, Blanchet FG, Kindt R, Legendre P, O'Hara RB, Simpson GL,
Solymos P, Stevens MHH, Wagner H: Vegan: Community Ecology Package.
http://cran.r-project.org/package=vegan.
18. Paradis E, Claude J, Strimmer K: APE: Analyses of Phylogenetics and
Evolution in R language. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:289–290.
19. Charif D, Lobry JR: SeqinR 1.0-2: a contributed package to the R project
for statistical computing devoted to biological sequences retrieval and
analysis. In Structural approaches to sequence evolution: Molecules, networks,
populations. Edited by Bastolla U, Porto M, Roman HE, Vendruscolo M. New
York: Springer Verlag; 2007:207–232.
20. Gower JC: A general coefficient of similarity and some of its properties.
Biometrics 1971, 27:857–871.
21. Jones DT, Taylor WR, Thornton JM: The rapid generation of mutation data
matrices from protein sequences. Comput Appl Biosci 1992, 8:275–282.
22. Gonnet GH, Cohen MA, Benner SA: Exhaustive matching of the entire
protein sequence database. Science 1992, 256:1443–1445.
23. Henikoff S, Henikoff JG: Amino acid substitution matrices from protein
blocks. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992, 89:10915–10919.
24. Dayhoff MO, Schwartz RM, Orcutt BC: A model of evolutionary change in
proteins. Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure 1978, 5:345–352.
25. Ng PC, Henikoff JG, Henikoff S: PHAT: a transmembrane-specific
substitution matrix. Predicted hydrophobic and transmembrane.
Bioinformatics 2000, 16:760–766.
26. Jones DT, Taylor WR, Thornton JM: A mutation data matrix for
transmembrane proteins. FEBS Lett 1994, 339:269–275.
27. Schliep KP: Phangorn: phylogenetic analysis in R. Bioinformatics 2011,
27:592–593.
28. Lucas A: Using amap and ctc Packages for Huge Clustering. R news 2006,
6:58–60.
29. Dimitriadou E, Hornik K, Leisch F, Meyer D, Weingessel A: Misc Functions of
the Department of Statistics (e1071), TU Wien. http://cran.r-project.org/
package=e1071.
30. Struyf A, Hubert M, Rousseeuw PJ: Integrating Robust Clustering
Techniques in S-PLUS. Computational Statistics and Data Analysis 1997,
26:17–37.
31. Rousseeuw P: Silhouettes: A Graphical Aid to the Interpretation and
Validation of Cluster Analysis. J Comput Appl Math 1987, 20:53–65.
32. Adler D, Nenadic O, Zucchini W: RGL: A R-library for 3D visualization with
OpenGL. In Proceedings of the 35th Symposium of the Interface: Computing
Science and Statistics: 12–15 March 2003; Salt Lake City. Edited by Braverman
A. Red Hook: Curran Associates, Inc; 2009:419–429.
33. Devillé J, Rey J, Chabbert M: An indel in transmembrane helix 2 helps to
trace the molecular evolution of class A G-protein-coupled receptors.
J Mol Evol 2009, 68:475–489.
34. Fredriksson R, Lagerstrom MC, Lundin LG, Schioth HB: The G-proteincoupled
receptors in the human genome form five main families.
Phylogenetic analysis, paralogon groups, and fingerprints. Mol Pharmacol
2003, 63:1256–1272.
35. Kreienkamp HJ, Larusson HJ, Witte I, Roeder T, Birgul N, Honck HH, Harder S,
Ellinghausen G, Buck F, Richter D: Functional annotation of two orphan Gprotein-
coupled receptors, Drostar1 and -2, from Drosophila
melanogaster and their ligands by reverse pharmacology. J Biol Chem
2002, 277:39937–39943.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-13-133
Cite this article as: Pelé et al.: Bios2mds: an R package for comparing
orthologous protein families by metric multidimensional scaling. BMC
Bioinformatics 2012 13:133.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color figure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Pelé et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2012, 13:133 Page 7 of 7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/13/133